Good afternoon, everyone.
I'm Doug Davidson,
and I'm here to talk to you about
polishing your Cocoa application.
So we all know that Cocoa is designed
for rapid application development.
It should make it easy to get
your application up and running.
But does that mean you're done?
Well, no.
Usually what it means is
that our customers just
increase their expectations.
But the good news is you're
going to spend your time not so
much on making your application
run as on making it run great.
And that's going to be
our theme for today.
We have a number of topics that
we're going to talk about today.
We'll talk about 64-bit.
We'll talk about performance,
responsiveness, security,
localization and internationalization.
We'll talk about usability and
about scripting and accessibility.
And now that happens,
I have a little sample application
that we're going to be working on.
It's called Zip Browser.
And what this little app does is to let
you look inside a Zip archive without
having to unarchive the whole thing.
Now, this is not available
as sample code just yet.
We're going to try to have
it out as soon as possible.
Look for the Zip Browser example.
So I'd like to show it to you.
Let's go over to the demo
machine and take a look.
[Transcript missing]
I'll show you an action.
Open something up.
Let's pick a zip archive and open
it up and there are the contents.
And you'll see we're using
an NSBrowser to display the
contents of the zip archive.
Now, those of you who have been using
Cocoa for some time might remember
that NSBrowser is one of the first
and oldest of the Cocoa controls.
And in recent years,
it's maybe lagged a little behind
some of the more modern controls
like the Table View and Outline View.
Well, no longer.
In Snow Leopard,
we have added a new set of methods
to NSBrowser that we call the
Item-Based API for NSBrowser.
Makes it really easy to use NSBrowser.
Makes it a joy to use.
And that's a good thing
because with NSBrowser,
you get a ton of functionality for free.
You get things like expansion tool tips.
You get the arrow key navigation.
You get type ahead.
And let's take a look at this.
You get this little preview.
This is the preview column here.
With NSBrowser,
all you have to do is provide the
view that does the drawing in this.
And NSBrowser does all the
management of bringing it in and out.
And here we've chosen to show a
little bit of information about
each entry in the zip archive,
just an icon, a name,
and the sizes within
and out of the archive.
OK.
So here's our application.
It compiles.
It launches.
It runs.
It's a little bit of a mess.
But it's a lot of work.
We have a lot of work
to do on this app today.
So let's take a look at some code.
Let's go into Xcode.
Now, this is a very simple
document-based application.
As it stands,
it's about 200 lines of code
and has three custom classes,
a model, a view, and a controller.
And what we're looking at right now
is a header for our model class,
zip entry, which models an individual's
entry in the zip archive,
and it stores some basic
information about it,
a name, a location in the archive,
the sizes, and so on.
And because there's an implicit tree
structure to these things that's
used to store directory hierarchies,
we have leaf and non-leaf entries,
and the non-leaf entries have
an array of child entries.
They're all very simple.
So let's take a look at our view class.
And our view class is the class
that does the drawing for that
preview column in the browser.
And again, it's extremely simple.
In our -- see, in our draw rect,
we use very standard Cocoa methods
to take this image that we
got from NSWorkspace -- it's
an icon -- and to draw it,
and then to take these various
pieces of text and to draw them,
and there's a little extra
code to calculate the sizes
so we can lay them out.
Perfectly standard Cocoa view techniques.
And then our model -- because we're
using a very simple document-based app,
we just have a subclass of NSDocument
that acts as -- I'm sorry -- that
acts as a controller for everything.
And so the main thing we have here
is the read from URL method that
gets the contents of the zip archive,
goes through it,
looking for all these entries,
creates the model objects,
and adds them to us.
And then I mentioned about the
item-based API for NSBrowser.
So let me show it to you.
Here it is.
This is the complete -- this is
This is all we do here as
the delegate of the browser.
I note, what is it, six one-line methods.
That's all we have to do,
and this browser does all the rest.
So what is it that we want
to do to this application?
So the first thing I'd like
to do is make it 64-bit.
Now, if you have been waiting to
make your app 64-bit ready,
now is the time.
64-bit is a big emphasis in Snow Leopard.
You heard Bertrand talk about it.
He explained why you want to do this.
Now, of course,
we're not making our apps 64-bit only.
We need them to run as
32-bit on 32-bit machines,
64-bit on 64-bit machines.
So what is it that we do for that?
First of all,
make a copy of your project.
Then we have a script.
In Snow Leopard,
we have a new Ruby-based script
that you run on all your source code
and that does some straightforward
substitutions to do the conversion.
And then you take a look at
all the differences between the
original and the modified version.
Yes, you have to look at all the diffs.
Now,
I've already done that for this project.
So let's take a look
at some of those diffs.
What sort of things are you going to see?
So the most common sort of thing
you'll see is that the script
has replaced 32-bit integers,
signed or unsigned, with things like
NSU integer and NSInteger,
which are the Cocoa integer types
for integers that are 32-bit
on 32-bit and 64-bit on 64-bit.
And usually this is exactly
the right thing to do.
In most cases, this is just fine.
But I've been looking through this,
and I noticed there are a few
places here where these values
actually represent things that I am
getting out of the zip archive that
are defined by the zip format to
be specifically sized quantities,
either 16 or 32-bit.
Now, it's not wrong what's done here.
I certainly could use
NSU integer for those.
It's plenty big enough.
But when I was looking at this,
I decided that it would more accurately
represent the intent of the code if
I used fixed-size types for these.
So I chose to use uint16t and uint32t.
Maybe I should have done
that from the beginning,
but in any event,
now is a good time to make that change.
What else are you going to see?
Here's another common thing where you run
into printf-style formatting integers.
Now, the script tags these cases because
printf-style formatting doesn't really
play very well with variable size
types like NSInteger and NSUInteger.
So you need to look at
these and do something.
And what I'm going to do is something
that's fairly straightforward,
sort of brute force,
but what I'm going to do
is take the arguments,
these integral arguments,
and cast them to something that
I know is big enough and that I know
printf-style formatting will understand,
usually a long or a long long.
And I've made those changes,
so let's look at the changes
that I've made after the script.
So here in this case,
what I've done is to take
the %u and add an l quality.
So I've added a modifier to it,
make it long,
and then cast the argument to an unsigned
long to make sure that the printf-style
formatting will understand it.
In the other cases,
I looked at through it and decided
which ones should be Uint32T and which
ones should be Uint16T and replaced
those uniformly throughout the project.
So let's take a look at that
updated version after 64-bit.
Let's try running it.
See if we can open up a zip archive.
And there we go.
We're writing in 64 bits.
Now let's go back to the slides.
And let me reprise those
steps for 64-bit Redius.
First one, make a copy of your project,
run the script on it.
Here's the location of the
script in Snow Leopard.
Then examine all the diffs and approve,
disapprove, or modify them.
There are some things that you
need to keep a special eye on.
As we saw,
uses of printf-style formatting may
require some judgment for converting.
Any cases where you're dealing with
formats on disk or that otherwise
go outside your application,
like the zip archive
format that I discussed,
those may need specifically sized types.
If you're doing archiving,
you may need to look at instances of
that to make sure that your archives
can be read and written on both
16 and 32 and 64 bit consistently.
Cases where you're dealing with pointers,
you need to make sure that
all your references to the
pointers are consistent.
And in one particular case,
if you're still using the
old non-keyed archiving,
you're going to have to deal with
both of these issues at once.
It could be done.
Maybe you want to consider whether
you really need to keep using
non-keyed archiving anymore.
You need to examine your dependencies.
If you're using somebody else's code,
then you need to look at that and make
sure that it is 64-bit ready as well.
And then finally,
you need to make sure you
thoroughly test the result.
And that's what you need to do to make
your app ready to run at 32 and 64-bit.
All right, let's go on to our next topic,
which is performance and responsiveness.
Now, performance is something that you
probably shouldn't be thinking a
great deal about while you're just
getting your app up and running.
But once you have it running,
it's time to look at it.
Now, I'm a great believer in testing
performance using user-level scenarios.
If you don't have a specific
user-level scenario that
shows a performance problem,
maybe there isn't a
performance problem there.
But if you have a user-level
scenario that shows a problem,
then you need to attack it.
And the mechanisms for attacking
performance problems are
probably pretty familiar to you.
Some of you may have gone to
the previous session upstairs,
the performance technique session
that showed some of these things.
Basically,
the guidelines for dealing with
performance issues are very simple,
three simple rules.
First, don't touch the disk.
Second, don't use memory.
And third, don't do work.
Now, this may not be quite
as simple as it sounds.
Let me explain what I mean.
Don't touch the disk.
Well, the disk is one of the slowest
components of a modern computer
by many orders of magnitude.
So every file system access
that you can get out of your
program is that much to the good.
This, for example,
is one of the main keys of
our file system efficiency
program for Snow Leopard that
we've been talking about,
that is to remove any redundant or
unnecessary file system accesses.
Now,
you might not think that your app has
any redundant file system accesses,
but maybe you should take a
look and check and find out.
You might be surprised.
Second thing, don't use memory.
Well, memory is a lot faster than disk,
but still it's a lot
slower than the processor.
So every bit of memory you can avoid
using is that much to the good.
Now, of course,
it's perfectly okay to use
memory if it's a substitute for
something that's more expensive,
like going to the disk or doing
a lot of expensive computation,
especially if you are willing
to give that memory back to
the system when it needs it.
And if you went to the
performance session earlier,
it was discussed,
the new caching and discardable contents
mechanisms for Snow Leopard that allow
you to give memory back to the system
when the system is under pressure.
And don't do work.
Well, sometimes it's unavoidable,
but we've all seen cases where a simple
change in algorithm or maybe doing
something lazily can get the same
task done by doing a lot less work.
And then when you come,
To the end of these techniques,
it's time to start
considering concurrency.
The way we want you to think about
concurrency in your app is not
so much as a series of threads,
but rather as a series of work
queues on which work units arrive,
they're scheduled, they're processed,
they're handled, they're done.
And this operation queue in Cocoa makes
it very easy to think this way.
But also,
and as run loop is a different sort
of work queue on which things arrive,
they're scheduled, they're processed,
they're handled.
Now, in an application,
the main thread with the main run loop
is special in that it is the work queue
on which user interaction events arrive.
And in a simple application,
maybe all the work is
done on the main run loop.
But in a more sophisticated application,
you would typically want to move
some work off of the main run loop.
So as to leave it free to do its main
job of handling user interaction,
and that's what keeps
your app responsive.
So, let's look at the next slide.
Now, you've probably heard Bertrand talk
about the Grand Central Dispatch
push for Snow Leopard.
Well, as Cocoa developers,
if you're using
NSOperationQueue and NSRunLoop,
you're in luck.
These are the classes that will
be the Cocoa interface to the
Grand Central Dispatch functionality.
You're already thinking in the right
way about handling work queues.
Now, one big point from the
previous performance session,
one point to take away is that you
want to avoid as much as possible any
concurrent access to shared mutable data.
Because whenever you have
contention for shared resource,
you're going to lose the
benefits of concurrency.
It's possible to lock, but as I say,
the contention for the lock
is going to degrade your
performance and your concurrency.
Fortunately, there is an alternative.
What you can do is create a
single-threaded operation queue,
and then for a specific shared resource,
make sure that the work on that
resource is sent -- always sent to
that particular operation queue.
Then the operation queue will
automatically take care of serializing
access to that resource for you,
and you don't have to
worry about locking.
Now, the final thing I want to
mention is that in a Cocoa app,
there are many potential
sources of concurrency,
implicit and explicit.
You can use NSThread if you need to,
but we really want to thank you
more in terms of work queues,
like at its operation queue,
especially for concurrency in your model.
In Snow Leopard,
we have some new sets of concurrent APIs.
If you saw the What's New talk,
we discussed the concurrent
collection APIs for things like
searching and sorting and iterating.
NSDocument has a new concurrent document
opening API so that you can make sure
if you're opening a number of documents,
that can all be done concurrently
with respect to each other.
NSView has a concurrent view drawing
API so that perhaps some of the
views in your window can be drawn
concurrently with respect to each other.
And there are other
sources of concurrency.
For example, if you use Core Animation,
that's an implicit source of concurrency.
The animation is done concurrently with
respect to whatever else you're doing.
And you can also use the GPU.
Concurrently with the CPU with OpenGL,
Core Image, Core Video,
and now in Snow Leopard with OpenCL.
So let's go over to our application
and go over to the demo.
We'll take a look at it.
And as it happens,
I do have a performance testing scenario,
user scenario.
And my scenario is to successively
open larger and larger zip documents
and see how the app handles it.
So if I start with a very small one,
that's pretty quick.
If I go to a little bit larger one,
that takes a little longer.
And then I could go to a really huge one.
Do I dare open this one?
Actually,
I think I better not try to open it.
I tried this before,
and really it's not pretty.
It just hangs the whole app.
Fortunately,
I managed to do some sampling.
And the sampling will show where
the problem lies pretty quickly.
In this case,
we take a look at the samples,
and we can go right down to the
document method and see what it's doing.
It's calling an NSData method.
The first thing this app does
is to load the whole contents
of the zip archive into memory.
Now, it's a really convenient API,
but it doesn't scale.
And furthermore, as it happens,
we don't really need access to all
the contents of the zip archive,
at least not at once.
We just need little bits
and pieces here and there,
mostly toward the end of the document,
actually, but still.
So we can try to solve that
and just look at the pieces
that we want when we want them.
That will remove great
many file system accesses.
It will greatly reduce the use of memory.
Now, is that enough?
Maybe.
But we can't necessarily rely on that,
because we don't know how many entries
are going to be in a zip archive.
It could be thousands of them.
We don't know how slow our
file system is going to be.
It might be on a USB drive.
It might be over the network.
So to be sure,
what we're going to do is take our
file system access and move it off
of the main run loop to maintain.
responsiveness in our application.
Let's see how that works.
Let me go to the improved
version of the application.
Now, what I've done here is
to add another class,
which I called FileBuffer.
What this is,
is just a very simple wrapper
around an NSFile handle that handles
access to the contents of the file,
and it does a little buffering that's
specialized for the uses of this app,
just to reduce the number of file
system accesses to a minimum.
And, oh, it does one other thing as well.
Because the Zip Archive
format is a little Indian,
I've written the API for this in
such a way that this class does
all of the byte swapping for me,
so there is absolutely no way
I can forget about Indian-ness.
And one thing I should
mention about this class,
a very simple class,
it is deliberately not thread safe.
Why is that?
Because access to a file descriptor,
which is what this does,
is something that inherently
has to be serialized.
I could make it thread safe by locking,
but I really don't want to lock.
Locking is difficult.
It's expensive.
It's hard to get right.
It's difficult to debug.
Instead, what I'm going to do is
what I mentioned before.
I'm going to use an NSOperation queue,
a single thread,
to serialize the access to this object.
Let's see how that works.
I'll go over to my document class.
Now, when I set up my document object,
I'm going to create an operation
queue for this document and
make it single-threaded.
Okay.
And then when I go
to read.
Oh, notice I'm going to use the
new Snow Leopard API for
concurrent document opening,
just for another extra whammy.
Document opening is going to be
concurrent with respect to each other.
Now, then when I go to read
one of these documents,
what I'm going to do is just to create
one of these file buffer objects.
And then I'm going to go and read
just a very little bit out of it,
just enough to make sure this
thing looks like a zip archive.
And then after that, after that,
I'm going to create an NS operation.
After that,
all the access to this file buffer is
going to occur on our operation queue.
I'm sure to maintain that.
So I created this operation.
It's a pretty trivial
subclass of NSOperation.
All it does is call
back into the document,
and it calls a particular method.
called read entries for "operation."
And this is the method that actually does
the work of going through and reading all
of the entries out of the zip archive,
and it reads everything
about the archive,
the location, the name, the size,
and so forth,
and then it creates that model object,
the zip entry object for
that entry in the archive.
And then it does something interesting.
What it does is to add that
entry object to an array.
And when we get enough
entries in the array,
then we call back to the main thread,
to the main run loop with
that array of entries,
and we call back to the main run loop
so that those entries can be added back
into the document and added to the UI,
because it's the main thread
that does the user interaction.
Let's see how well this works.
So now what I'm going to do is open
all three of these things at once.
Ready, set, go.
Boom.
All of them opened at once,
including this giant one, which contains,
I think it's all of GarageBand's data.
And if you look very closely,
you may have seen a bit of a flash where
the UI came up before it was populated.
That is the effect of doing
this in the background.
So that is our performance
work on this application.
And let us go back to the slides.
So the next thing I want
to talk about is security.
Now, I can remember a time not
so very long ago when,
particularly for a simple
little app like this,
nobody would have thought
very much about security.
That time is long past.
In particular, it is not possible to take
a data file from somewhere,
who knows where,
assume it's a particular data format,
read bytes out of it,
and just take them for granted,
assume they mean what they say.
No, you can't do that.
The right attitude is
external data is poison.
It's radioactive.
You handle it with rubber gloves,
with a 10-foot pole.
So much so that even if you don't
have any poison data on hand,
you need to create some yourself
through a process called fuzzing.
And what fuzzing is,
is you take a good data file and you
modify it by putting in random bits.
And you don't modify just any part of it.
You modify the most sensitive parts,
the ones that determine the
structure of the document.
You change the bytes.
You insert bytes.
You remove bytes.
You create a whole set of bad data
and see how your app handles them.
So I happen to have done that
for this particular application.
Let's see how it handles it.
Let's go back over to the demo.
Okay, here's our original Zip browser.
Let's run it.
And here's a particular piece of
fuzzed data that we've produced.
Let's try it.
And boom.
We get back into the debugger.
And here we are at this particular line.
And let's look at this directory index.
And it looks like directory index
is some completely wild value.
Well, it turns out the directory
index is a value that we
happen to get out of the file.
And we trusted it.
What were we thinking?
So what are we going to do about this?
What we're going to do about
this is introduce some paranoia.
Here's our updated document.
And here is the method we were
looking at a little before,
an updated version of the application.
This reads the entries
from the zip archive.
And then whenever it reads a value,
it checks it every possible way.
Now remember that integral arithmetic
can cause values to wrap around,
so you need to check everything not
only to make sure to take it above,
but also check it below because
it might have wrapped around.
You check and make sure every value
is same before you ever try to use it.
You might worry a bit about performance
with adding all these extra checks.
Well, there are a couple answers to that.
First of all,
first answer is that you shouldn't
worry too much about your performance
if your app wants crashing.
The second one...
The second one is that these
sorts of checks don't really
touch the disk anymore.
They don't really use any more memory.
They just use a little
bit of processor time.
So they shouldn't make a great deal
of difference to your performance.
And in the case of this app, they don't.
So let's try this on that same
piece of data and see how it works.
There's that poison piece of data.
Try it.
And ah, we recognize that it's bad,
and we refuse to open it.
So that is security.
Let's go back to the slides.
And to our next topic.
So the next thing I want to talk about
is localization and internationalization.
Now, this is something that's very
important to Apple because we know
that most of our customers are not U.S.
English-only customers.
And it should be important to you because
it could be that most of your customers,
if you were interested in
internationalization and localization,
it could be that most of your
customers would not be U.S.
English-only, too.
Now, in general,
internationalization is difficult.
Fortunately,
what we have done in Cocoa is we have
done almost all the hard work for you.
It makes it easy if you just use
the classes as they're intended
to be international ready.
It's not free.
In particular,
you still need to test your application.
You need to test with your localizations.
You need to test with various locales,
as we'll be discussing.
You need to test with content
that comes from other places that
are in many different languages.
And also, international content can
stress different failure
modes in your application.
So things like that fuzzing testing,
you should probably do it over
again with international data.
There was a very good study that
showed that there was a very good
study that showed that there was
a very good session yesterday on
internationalizing your software.
You may be able to look at that.
I hope some of you intended it.
Let me talk about some of
these topics specifically.
So first of all, about localization.
Now, the things you need to do for
localization are things that
are good practice generally.
You're probably already doing them.
Things that you should be doing,
even if you don't have
any immediate plans,
to ship localized versions
of your application.
These are things like putting
most of your UI into your nibs,
making the nibs localized resources so
that potentially your localizers could
produce localized versions of them,
making sure that all user-visible
strings are localized.
So the first thing you need to do
is to create a localizable string
in a not-strings file that's a
localized resource in your bundle.
And you need to be a little careful
about how you construct these strings.
In particular,
you don't want to be making assumptions
about what the strings might look like.
So you shouldn't, in general,
try to programmatically construct things
like construct sentences from their parts
because you don't know how that would
behave in the wide variety of languages.
For example, these strings here all mean,
I believe, allow editing.
But if you were to try to construct
these from parts like allow and editing,
maybe you wanted to construct
allow editing and deny editing,
there is no way that you are going
to be able to tell in advance
which of these pieces of the string
mean allow and which mean editing.
So you should just use the
whole string and let your
localizers handle that for you.
Locale.
Now, on Mac OS X we think of locale as
something different from localization.
Localization is the language
that your application uses
to communicate with the user.
Locale has to do with the way
that the user's data is formatted.
These are things like date formats,
number formats, calendars,
sort and order and so forth.
And the biggest thing to remember
when you're using these is to make
use of the appropriate system classes,
things like NSDate formatter,
NSNumber formatter.
These will automatically
handle the proper formatting.
You should create them.
Don't try to use -- as much as possible
try to avoid hardcoded format strings.
And just let these
classes do their thing.
They know how the user wants
these pieces of data presented.
They usually have various different
options that you can turn on and off.
For different kinds of formats.
Shorter formats,
longer formats and so forth.
And don't make assumptions about
how they're going to end up
formatting the dates or the numbers.
Here are some various examples.
Along the top we have
various number formats.
Some of them using the
Indo-Arabic digits.
Some of them using the Arabic digits.
We have some date formats.
In general you're not going to
be able to predict what these
will look like across languages.
So don't try to do it.
good.
Text handling.
A great deal of international
data is international data in
many different languages and
many different writing systems.
To handle that, I shouldn't need to
mention you use Unicode.
In particular, in Cocoa,
you use the classes
NSString and its allies,
NSAttributedString and so forth.
If you want to display these things,
you can
If you want to have your users edit text,
please, I recommend using the
Cocoa text system for this.
We have done a lot of hard work to
make sure that international text
can be displayed and edited properly.
You should not just use NSString and
NSAttributedString classes,
but you should make sure you use
their APIs for things like searching,
sorting, casing, substrings,
and so forth.
You don't want to be in a position
where you are trying to go through
a string character by character.
For Unicode,
that doesn't even work generally,
because in Unicode,
A particular visible character may be
made up of many characters in the string.
There might be, for example,
a base letter and its accents
as separate characters.
In Korean, you might have a hangul jamul
separately that combine to form a
single user visible we call graphene.
So if you have to deal with strings,
in Cocoa these are referred to
as composed character sequences.
If you're going to take
a substring of a string,
make sure it lies on composed
character sequence boundaries.
And then a string has APIs for these.
And finally,
don't make assumptions about how
the text is going to display.
Some text displays left to right.
Some text displays right to left.
Here's an example I've given before.
So at the top, we have the characters as
they appear in the string,
some English text, some Arabic text.
At the bottom,
we have the glyphs as they're
displayed by the text system.
There isn't a one-to-one
mapping between the characters
and the displayed elements.
And it doesn't go uniformly
from left to right.
It starts out going from left to right,
then it turns around and
goes back from right to left.
So you can't necessarily assume how
strings are going to be displayed.
Something new we have in Snow Leopard,
talking about composed
character sequences,
is a block-based API for
enumerating through a string.
And you can go through the
string many different ways.
You can do it by composed
character sequences,
by words, by sentences, by lines,
by paragraphs, just by passing different
options to this API.
And we have an even simpler convenience
API that just goes through a string
by lines if you want to go through
the lines in a piece of text.
Very simple, easy to use,
based on blocks.
One last thing, encodings.
And a string is what you use for
text inside your application.
If you want to write something
out in persistent format,
if you need to deal with anything
that goes outside your application,
then you're going to need some
encoding form for the text.
And of course,
we strongly recommend that you
use one of the Unicode encodings,
UTF-8 or UTF-16 particularly.
And a string will easily do a conversion
between any encoding that you may want
and the internal form in a string.
We have a specific API,
the file system representation
APIs for strings that are considered
as names in the file system.
UTF-8 is used for most other purposes.
But you're probably going to
occasionally encounter legacy
formats with other encodings.
Again, you can use NSString to
do the conversion.
Now, sooner or later,
you'll probably run into a case where you
have some bytes that you think are text,
but you don't know what
encoding they're in.
But what do you do then?
You have to guess.
You may be able to guess something based
on the context in which the text appears.
You might be able to guess
something based on its contents,
maybe not.
We recommend a good thing to
do is try UTF-8 first because
it's a very specific encoding,
very difficult to mistake
anything else for it,
very stringent.
Then you might try something else
that you might have guessed based
on the context in which it appears.
And you might try some other fallbacks.
We recommend that as
a very final fallback,
you use Mac Roman because that's
always going to succeed with
any random string of bytes.
And, but you have to understand that if
you're going to guess the encoding,
sometimes you might get it wrong.
So one final thing that you can do is to
allow the user to change the encoding,
to take what you have guessed and change
it to something else and reinterpret
And I have an example of that.
Let's go on to the demo.
We'll take a look at it.
So let's go back to Xcode and take
a look at our original example.
And down at the bottom here,
I have a couple of
international zip archives.
Now, I want to say something
about the zip archive format.
In spite of the fact that it is
included by reference in a couple of
-- several different ISO standards,
the zip format is not
itself standardized.
What we have is a set of notes from the
people who implemented it originally.
And up until very recently,
these notes didn't really say
anything about the encoding of the
names inside the zip archive files.
Originally, actually,
they used -- the first
implementation used a DOS encoding,
CodePage 437.
But I think in practice what
most people have done is just
take their file system names,
byte for byte,
copy them into the files without
worrying about encodings.
So you might encounter just
about anything in there.
Mac OS X uses UTF-8.
And more and more things
are using UTF-8 now.
Actually, the format now has a little
bit for specifying UTF-8.
I don't know that anyone uses it yet,
but it's there.
So this leaves us with
something of a conundrum.
We have to do something about it.
We have these bytes in the
document format that are names,
and we don't necessarily know
what encoding they might be in.
So let's see what our original
application does with one of these.
And it fails to open it.
Let's see what it does with this one.
And the reason it does this is
because when we originally wrote this
first version of the application,
it just assumes that the contents of
these names are going to be UTF-8.
That's what Mac OS X does.
That's what it assumes.
If it can't, it fails.
Let's take a look at
how we can improve that.
And let's go to the updated version.
And try to open these same documents.
Let's start with this one.
And this one opens correctly.
I see I have a name with a
couple of accented Es in it.
And the reason it opens correctly is
because we have some fallbacks here.
If UTF-8 doesn't work,
we try some other encodings.
Let's try this other one.
This one opens,
but it doesn't look quite right.
I don't think that's really
the name that was intended.
So in addition,
We've used our fallbacks,
and they produce something,
but it doesn't seem to be right.
So we've added a Reopen with
Encoding menu to this application,
so we can try a different encoding.
UTF-8 is the default.
Let's try Windows.
No, that doesn't seem right.
Try that old DOS encoding.
That still doesn't look quite right.
Maybe Mac?
No.
I think maybe it's a Japanese file,
so let's try some Japanese encodings.
That one doesn't look right.
Hey, that one looks pretty good.
OK,
so we've given the user the ability to
correct our guess if the guess was wrong.
Let's see how that works, the code.
So we're back to the method that reads
the entries out of the zip archive.
And here's where we're
interpreting the name.
So we start off,
each document has an encoding.
The default encoding is UTF-8.
We start off by interpreting it,
trying to interpret the
data without encoding.
If that doesn't work,
we use the file system representation,
which is a form of UTF-8.
If that still doesn't work,
we'll try the standard Windows Latin.
and Cody.
And as a final ultimate fallback,
we fall back to Mac Roman,
as we know that always succeeds.
And how about the reopening?
We've added some support
for an action method,
reopen with encoding.
And what this method does is,
first of all, remember that all the file
operations for this document take
place on our operation queue.
So if the document is still being
-- in the process of being read,
we have to stop that and
wait until it's done.
And then we're going to try to
re-read it using a different encoding.
And the way I chose to do
this was to make the encoding
as the tag on the menu item.
And so we set the document's
encoding to that specified encoding,
and then we reopen the document
using the standard read method,
which goes back through
and then reads the document
again using the new encoding.
And that is how we enable support
for these different encodings.
And then we're going to go ahead and run
the process of re-reading the document.
And then,
You remember that we had
some numbers in there.
And you'll remember the way we
were presenting those numbers,
we were using present-half
style formatting with percent,
and ultimately
These are numbers that are going
to be presented to the user.
So we want to make sure they're
properly formatted for that.
So for that,
we use an NSNumber formatter.
So I've created code that
creates an NSNumber format
or sets an appropriate style,
decimal
And I decided to not use
the grouping separator.
The grouping separator is
like a comma in English usage.
Some other places,
a period is a thousand separator.
And then for each of these numbers,
we're just calling string from
number to get an appropriate
string from that formatter.
And then in our methods
that produce these strings
that we're going to display,
first of all,
we make sure they're localized.
And this localized string makes
sure that these format strings
come from a localized string.
So we've got a localizable.strings file.
And then we use present at as a format.
And in it, we get the string value that
we got from a number formatter.
That makes sure that the numbers are
properly formatted for international use.
So let's go back to the slides.
And on to our next topic.
The next topic is usability.
Now, this is a very broad topic,
and everybody has their
own opinions about it.
But in general,
what happens is that most applications
are going to be originally developed
and used by a small group of people
who know the app really well.
And in order to understand
more about their usability,
you need to see how they are used
by larger groups of people who
may work in many different ways,
people who don't necessarily
know the app really well.
So you should try your app out with
groups of people and see what they do,
see what they understand,
see what they don't understand.
Pay particular attention to the
defining features of the Mac interface,
simplicity of interface with direct
manipulation at the heart of it.
And when you find that you can do
something automatically for your users,
you may provide a way
for them to opt out.
It's a good idea to do it.
We spent a lot of effort, for example,
making sure that you can do things
like saving state so when your users
come back into your application,
it's easier for them to
get back where they were.
Now, there are a lot of things
that I could show for this,
but I picked one.
And let's go over to the demo machine,
and I'll take a look at the one
thing that I decided to show here.
Let's go to our original application,
launch it again, run it,
open a zip archive.
Now,
One thing I know is that Mac users
being used to direct manipulation,
when they see something like this,
they're going to want to try and
pick up this thing and drag it.
You know, it doesn't drag.
I can't drag this thing
out to the desktop.
I didn't add support for
drag out of my application.
So let's do it.
Let's go into Xcode.
Let's take a look at the updated
version of the application.
And let's see what we needed to do in
order to add drag and drop support.
Let's go into the document class.
And now there are several
different code paths for this,
depending on exactly where
you're dragging from.
But I'm going to show you how you
add dragging support using the
browser with the new item-based API.
And that's very simple.
We have a few methods.
One of them is canDrag.
And I decided to implement
dragging of just a single item,
if a single item is selected.
And I implemented a common method
that returns the entry that is
selected if dragging is allowed
for that particular selection.
And then you get to provide
an image for the drag.
And I chose to use that
icon from NS Workspace.
It's the same thing which
we're showing in the view.
And so I get the entry,
and I get the icon from NS Workspace.
And I return it.
Then, when eventually we're going to be
called to actually write these things
out to the pasteboard for dragging.
And for dragging to the finder,
I'm using the file
promise pasteboard type.
I'm going to be really lazy about
doing my pasteboard operations.
With the file promise pasteboard type,
all you do at the original
drag time is you declare types,
including the file's promise types.
And for the file promise types,
you add an array.
And the only contents of the
array are the type of the file.
You don't have to write the file
out until it's actually dropped.
And then when it's actually dropped,
We got another browser-delicate
method that-- sorry.
that calls on us to redeem our promise.
It's called names of promised
files dropped at destination,
which means we have to write the
file out in the destination folder.
And I implemented a
method that does that.
Write drag rows with indexes.
That does the writing of the file,
the entry in the archive.
Actually, it doesn't do it.
Remember that all the file
access in this class has been
sent to our operation queue.
So what this method does is create
an operation and put it on the queue.
We create a write operation.
And again, this is a trivial
subclass of NS4 operation.
All it does is call back into the
document as a particular method.
Let me show you that method.
There's the write entry method.
And what this will do,
it'll be called on the operation queue,
and its job is to take that
entry in the zip archive.
It may be compressed,
and if it's compressed,
it'll have to expand it,
and then write it out
to our destination URL.
So remember, again,
We take a look at every value
that we get out of the file,
and we treat it with
the utmost suspicion.
We have to check it above and
below and make sure it makes sense
before we do anything with it.
If we think it makes sense,
Then we are going to take a look and
get the actual data out of the archive.
As I said, it might be compressed,
it might not be.
If it's not compressed,
we simply write it out.
If it is compressed,
we're using the libz here
to do the uncompression.
And it has a fairly straightforward API.
In this case, we're uncompressing it
out into another data,
immutable data.
And we were sure to check all the return
values to make sure they make sense.
There's actually a CRC value.
So we check the CRC in each case.
To make sure that it agrees
with the values of the store.
And if it's not,
we don't trust that data.
And then we write it out to our file.
And let's see how that works.
Launch and run.
Open up the zip archive again.
Take a look.
Try to drag it out.
It's going.
Now we're on the desktop.
Let it go.
There it is.
Let's make sure that file's really there.
Open it up.
There it is.
So our drag and drop works.
Let's go back to the slides.
And the next topic I want to deal
with is scripting and accessibility.
But in order to do that,
I've asked our accessibility guru,
James Dempsey,
to come up and talk about that for us.
So welcome, James.
Thank you very much, Doug.
So usually when we think about users
interacting with our applications,
we think about them with an
input device and mouse events,
key events,
multi-touch gesture events even.
But on Mac OS X,
there are two additional ways that users
can interact with your applications,
scripting and accessibility.
And in fact, it's two ways that users can
interact with your application
from a separate process.
And so here we have your application.
And let's say the user
starts running a script.
And using inter-process communications,
they're driving your application.
And from accessibility,
it's the same way.
We call an application or process using
accessibility an assistive application.
And through IPC,
it can also drive your application.
Let's take a little bit closer
look at your application.
We'll go down to a kind of well-factored
Cocoa app with model view and controller.
So scripting, the IPC method that it
uses is Apple Events.
And your application provides
a scripting dictionary,
which is essentially a set of
classes and commands that are
a scripting representation of
the model in your application.
And so when a user is
scripting your application,
they're interacting with your app,
driving it through the model.
With accessibility and
assistive application,
the IPC mechanism that it's using,
Our Mac OS X's accessibility client APIs,
the AX APIs.
And an assistive application is
getting information about and driving
your application through the view.
So they both drive your
app from another process,
but they do so in very different ways.
And they do that because
scripting and accessibility,
while similar in some respects,
have very different purposes on Mac OS X.
Let's talk about scriptability first.
It's the foundation for building
automated workflows on Mac OS X.
And since workflows,
taking some data from one application,
moving it along from app to app,
processing it along the way,
it's a very data-centric activity.
It makes a lot of sense that scripting
deals with the model of your application.
It's not about selecting this
menu or it's about grabbing the
people out of your address book,
doing something with them
in this word processor,
doing something else
with them in a database.
Scriptability, as you might imagine,
gives users a great deal of
flexibility to work your application
into all kinds of workflows,
things you might not have even imagined
your application would be used for.
Now, back at the turn of the century,
scriptability essentially
meant users using AppleScript.
But since the turn of the century,
we have a lot of additions to this.
When you make your
application scriptable,
that also forms the basis for you
to provide automator actions so that
users of automator can build kind
of higher-level automated workflows.
And with the Apple Event Bridge,
not only AppleScript as a language,
but use Ruby or Python or even a
compiled language like Objective-C.
Now, we don't have a great deal of
time in this session to get
into making your app scriptable.
But fortunately-- oh,
I forgot one small point,
which is scriptability is
a feature you implement.
Your application opts
in to scriptability.
And we do have a session just happened,
but it'll be coming out on your
IDC on iTunes subscription,
Making Your Application Scriptable.
I highly recommend taking a
look at that session and doing
just what its title says.
So if scriptability and
scripting deals with your model,
and it kind of makes sense why,
why does anybody need
access to my view anyway?
So what I'd like you to do is just
consider for a moment the case of
a user with a visual disability.
Trying to use a graphical user interface.
The user is unable to see
what is on the screen.
And so that user needs to have what's
going on in the interface described.
They need to be able to navigate
and interact with applications
without using the mouse.
And they also need to get
notified when things change,
like when windows and sheets come and go.
And so the primary purpose of the
Accessibility API is to provide
users with this alternate interface.
Now Mac OS X ships a built-in screen
reader application called VoiceOver.
It's been shipping since Tiger.
But there are also many other third-party
applications that use the Accessibility
API to provide this alternate interface.
Now the way it works is it's a
collaboration between two processes,
your application and the
assistive application.
So your application provides
accessibility information about
what's going on in the UI,
and then an assistive app like
VoiceOver takes that information
and presents a unified,
specialized interface for users.
Now, this is a public API,
and in addition to its primary purpose,
there are other uses of
that accessibility API.
So if you've seen demos in
Instruments or Automator,
there's a record and playback
of the interface feature.
That is using accessibility.
GUI scripting is using accessibility,
which is a handy way to build
automated user interface test
suites for your application.
And then numbers of third-party apps
and utilities also use this API.
Now, not everybody realizes it,
even Cocoa developers that may have
been around the block a few times,
that it's not opt-in.
Your application,
if it's out there in the world,
it's already reporting
accessibility information.
VoiceOver users have already
downloaded it and taken a look.
And if you've done no
accessibility work on your app,
then the results will be somewhat good,
bad, or ugly.
But if you've done no
accessibility work at all,
there'll be your share of ugly in there.
So let's talk about how
we would address that.
Actually, before we do that,
one more point about
application accessibility,
which is, what is this information that
my app's already given out?
I didn't even know it was.
What's going on?
It's a lightweight representation
of your user interface.
So that accessibility
client gets a small thing,
a UI element ref,
which is essentially a small token
or a small proxy back to a real user
interface element in your application.
Each of these little UI elements
that the accessibility client has
has a particular role that lets
you know what the type of thing is.
Is it the application itself, a window,
a button?
And this forms a hierarchy of user
interface elements that describe your UI.
Now what does that map back
to in your application?
It maps back to actual NSObjects
and NSObjects subclasses.
That accessibility information is
provided by objects that implement
the NSAccessibility protocol.
Now,
all the heavy hitters in AppKit already
implement this application,
NSWindow, NSCell, NSView, NSControl.
And so in AppKit,
there's already a great deal
of accessibility built in.
So you're already getting a good
default amount of accessibility.
However, there's always more to be done.
There's always a little
more you can provide.
So some examples are,
if there are images in
your user interface,
it's easy for us to describe a button
to somebody if it has a text title.
But if it's a picture of something,
we don't know what that something is.
We need you to go into Interface Builder,
select that button,
type in a title in the accessibility
inspector portion of the inspector.
Connecting related UI elements like what
text fields go with what static text.
Full keyboard navigation.
A user who has a visual disability
isn't able to use the mouse.
They need to use the keyboard
to get everything done.
And then finally,
if you've created a custom
view or a custom control,
the default work we can do
in the kit only goes so far.
We don't know what you're doing
in that control or that view.
So you need to provide the
accessibility information for us.
And the tools you can use
to test that accessibility,
accessibility inspector,
accessibility verifier,
or turning on voiceover and navigating
around to see how your app appears.
in VoiceOver.
Now,
we're just scratching the surface here.
I would very much encourage you to take
a look at the application accessibility
session from earlier this week.
But for now,
I'd like to show a little demo.
[Transcript missing]
And in the doc is
Accessibility Inspector.
And as I point to various
things on the screen,
it uses the Accessibility API to give
me information about those elements.
And so if I take a look at the window,
I'm getting a lot of
information about its size,
its position, et cetera.
If I look within the view,
all of the standard controls I'm seeing,
okay, these are all nicely accessible.
If I go to our custom view, however,
you'll notice it doesn't believe
anything is there at all.
And so what I'm going to do is let's
take a look at how we'd fix that in code.
Let me close the inspector here.
Now if we just peek very quickly
at what that custom view is,
Let's see.
Go to draw rect.
And you'll notice here that
it's a fairly simple draw rect.
However, I mentioned that what we would
like -- or I didn't mention --
what we would like to happen is for
that image to show up as an image,
each of those static elements in the
inspector to show up as static text.
Yet we don't have an object
on the back end to implement
the NS Accessibility Protocol.
So we have two options.
We could either create some NSObject
subclasses whose only job in life
is to implement the Accessibility
Protocol and report the correct
information for those classes,
or we could take another approach,
which is let's take our custom view and
replace it with standard Cocoa views.
Because this custom view
isn't doing a great deal.
It's just a view,
and then from that view it's drawing
an image and a few pieces of text.
If we were to replace that with
a view that just had an image
view and some text fields in it,
we would pick up the
accessibility for free.
So sometimes the best way to implement
accessibility is to just use kit classes.
To that end, let's go with that approach.
So I'm now going to switch over to after,
do a build and go.
[Transcript missing]
Set our inspector up.
And you'll notice now we
are getting an AX image,
we are getting a static text,
and so we are reporting
accessibility information.
And that's all I have.
Back to slides, please.
So here are some take-home points.
Once you've got your
application up and running,
there's usually a lot more to be done.
Important thing is to test
your application with a wide
variety of scenarios and data,
and consider these various points:
64-bit, performance, responsiveness,
security, localization,
internationalization, usability,
scripting, and accessibility.
For more information,
you can contact Derek Horne.
We have documentation and sample code.
This should be up soon as sample code.
There are a number of other related
sessions that we've been discussing.
Most of them have already taken place.
There's a session after
this on performance and
document-centric Cocoa Apps.
Now, we were going to do some Q&A,
but since James is here,
I thought maybe we'd get a song instead.
So, let's welcome up James Dempsey
and the Breakpoints.
Great.
So for those of you,
from the sound of it,
somebody's seen something
like this before at WWDC.
And you may notice that there
are a few things missing.
One, no guitars and no lead guitarist.
So this year, Gordy Friedman,
who is our lead guitarist
for the Breakpoints,
about a week, week and a half ago,
found out he was not going to
be able to make it to WWDC.
So we, through the magic of GarageBand,
he's going to be with us in
both sound and in spirit.
We figured since we
were mixing things up,
maybe this year I'd get out from
behind the guitar as well and
just try to belt one out for you.
So, let's see.
Oh, so I just wanted to get a
show of hands real quick.
How many folks here are
pretty new to Objective-C,
like in the last six months to a year?
So, a few folks.
Great.
How many folks have been doing
Objective-C for at least a year?
Awesome.
Three years.
Five years.
How many folks are named Oli Ozer?
Excellent.
All seven of you.
So I think it's extremely exciting
at WWDC this year because with
Mac sales increasing all the time,
it seems, with the new iPhone SDK,
I think this is perhaps the
time in Objective-C's history
where the most new people have
been coming into the language,
which I think is fantastic.
What I wanted to do this year was a
little something that maybe will give
a little advice to some newcomers,
but also do something
that the old-timers,
I hope, will really appreciate.
So without further ado, let's hit it.
♪ Designated initializer ♪ ♪
It got the better of me ♪ ♪ Yeah,
yeah ♪
Designated Initializer Oh,
it got the better of me
♪ It's a cautionary tale,
my friend ♪ ♪ I'm sure
you will agree ♪ ♪ Well,
don't do what I did do ♪
♪ Or it'll happen to you ♪
♪ Like it happened to me ♪
Let's start at the beginning.
♪ Well when you unlock a memory block
♪ ♪ It's allocated with precision ♪
♪ That is a pointer's assigned ♪ ♪
So your instance can find its class's
definition ♪ ♪ All the other i-vars are
filled up with zeros ♪ ♪ Thus nil-dip
to objects they refer ♪ ♪ And then your
instance must wait ♪ ♪ To be put in a
good state ♪ ♪ By an object initializer ♪
[Transcript missing]
♪ You got the better of me ♪ ♪
No I didn't forget ♪ ♪ But I did forget ♪
♪ We'll get there soon,
just wait and see ♪ ♪ A class with
many a nits ♪ ♪ Use the one that best
fits ♪ ♪ There's power in the variety ♪
♪ I could be subclassed right
♪ ♪ Or be debugging all night
♪ ♪ Like what happened to me ♪
[Transcript missing]
as a funnel point.
Its setup logic makes it much wiser.
That funnel point, well,
it passes to its superclass's
designated favorite son.
Though it may sound like a blooper,
the rest don't call super.
They call your chosen one.
Now here's what happened to me.
I wrote a subclass.
I initialized a set of critical states.
Critical.
I didn't override my
super's init methods,
which was ill-advised.
Ill-advised.
Anyone calling those init methods doomed
the new instance to a crashing face.
My superclass's code was called,
but never mind.
My critical state was not initialized.
I initialized that
designated initializer.
It got the better of me.
It was a subtle catch
with dynamic dispatch.
Yeah, it got the better of me.